[SYCL] Update compiler design doc to reflect changed action graphs. (#1625)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/CompilerAndRuntimeDesign.md

![High level component diagram for DPC++ Compiler](images/Compiler-HLD.svg)

> <div align="center"> Diagram 1. Application build flow. </div>

Reviewer: @kbobrovs can you please check that HTML inside Markdown does not break Sphinx?

```bash
sudo apt-get install -y doxygen graphviz ssh ninja-build
sudo pip3 install 'sphinx==3.0.0' 'recommonmark==0.6.0' 'sphinx_markdown_tables==0.0.12'
python $DPCPP_HOME/llvm/buildbot/configure.py -w $DPCPP_HOME \
        -s $DPCPP_HOME/llvm -o $DPCPP_HOME/build -t Release --docs
cmake --build . --target docs-sycl-html
cd build/tools/sycl/doc/html
```

(You can find full script here: https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/.github/workflows/gh_pages.yml)

Author: @alexbatashev, works for me:
```
$ cmake --build . --target docs-sycl-html
[1/1] Generating html Sphinx documentation for sycl into "/ws/sycl/build-doc/tools/sycl/doc/html"
/usr/local/lib/python3.6/dist-packages/recommonmark/parser.py:75: UserWarning: Container node skipped: type=document
  warn("Container node skipped: type={0}".format(mdnode.t))
$ echo $?
0
```

DPC++ compiler logically can be split into the host compiler and a number of
device compilers—one per each supported target. Clang driver orchestrates the
compilation process, it will invoke the device compiler once per each requested
target, then it will invoke the host compiler to compile the host part of a
SYCL source. In the simplest case, when compilation and linkage are done in one
compiler driver invocation, once compilation is finished, the device object
files (which are really LLVM IR files) are linked with the `llvm-link` tool.
The resulting LLVM IR module is then translated into a SPIRV module using the
`llvm-spirv` tool and wrapped in a host object file using the
`clang-offload-wrapper` tool. Once all the host object files and the wrapped
object with device code are ready, the driver invokes the usual platform linker
and the final executable called "fat binary" is produced. This is a host
executable or library with embedded linked images for each target specified at the command
line.

There are many variations of the compilation process depending on whether user
chose to do one or more of the following:
- perform compilation separately from linkage

> - compile the device SPIRV module ahead-of-time to one or more targets

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- compile the device SPIRV module ahead-of-time for one or more targets
```

- perform device code splitting so that device code is distributed across

>   multiple modules rather than one

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  multiple modules rather than in a single one
```

Author: ok (with slight rewording)

>   multiple modules rather than one

Author: ```suggestion
  multiple modules rather than enclosed in a single one
```

> - linkage of static device libraries is requested

Reviewer 3: This bullet doesn't match with previous ones, how about something like
```suggestion
- perform linkage of static device libraries
```

  handle transformed LLVM IR.
  - Optionally: LLVM IR → SPIR-V translator.
- **Back-end** - produces native "device" code in ahead-of-time compilation

> mode. Shown as "Target-specific LLVM compiler". Backend is invoked at compiler
> time only in ahead-of-time compilation scenario. Otherwise it is invoked at
> runtime - JIT compilation sceanrio.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
mode. Shown as "Target-specific LLVM compiler". Backend is invoked at
compile-time only in ahead-of-time compilation scenario. Otherwise, it is
invoked at runtime (just-in-time compilation scenario).
```

Author: Updated per @pvchupin 's comment

*Design note: in current design we use SYCL device front-end compiler to produce the

> integration header for two reasons: first, it must be possible to use any host
> compiler to produce SYCL heterogeneous application, and second, even if the
> same clang compiler is used for the host compilation, information provided in the
> integration header is used (included) by the SYCL runtime implementation so it
> must be ready before the host compilation starts.*

Reviewer 2: For readability purposes:
```suggestion
integration header for two reasons. First, it must be possible to use any host
compiler to produce SYCL heterogeneous applications. Second, even if the
same clang compiler is used for the host compilation, information provided in the
integration header is used (included) by the SYCL runtime implementation, so the
former must be available before the host compilation starts.*
```

Author: ok (with slight rewording)

> integration header for two reasons: first, it must be possible to use any host
> compiler to produce SYCL heterogeneous application, and second, even if the
> same clang compiler is used for the host compilation, information provided in the
> integration header is used (included) by the SYCL runtime implementation so it
> must be ready before the host compilation starts.*

Author: ```suggestion
integration header for two reasons. First, it must be possible to use any host
compiler to produce SYCL heterogeneous applications. Second, even if the
same clang compiler is used for the host compilation, information provided in the
integration header is used (included) by the SYCL runtime implementation, so the
header must be available before the host compilation starts.*
```

  handle transformed LLVM IR.
  - Optionally: LLVM IR → SPIR-V translator.
- **Back-end** - produces native "device" code in ahead-of-time compilation
mode. Shown as "Target-specific LLVM compiler". Backend is invoked at compiler
time only in ahead-of-time compilation scenario. Otherwise it is invoked at

> runtime - JIT compilation sceanrio.

Author: ok

*Design note: Current design does not use the host compiler to produce the
integration header for two reasons: first, it must be possible to use any host
compiler to produce SYCL heterogeneous application, and second, even if the

> same clang is used for the host compilation, information provided in the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
same clang compiler is used for the host compilation, information provided in the
```

- target triple and a native tool chain for each target (including "virtual"
targets like SPIR-V).
- SYCL offload action based on generic offload action.

SYCL compilation pipeline has a peculiarity compared to other compilation
scenarios - some of the actions in the pipeline may output multiple "clusters"
of files, consumed later by other actions. For example, each device binary maybe
accompanied by a symbol table and a specialization constant map - additional
information used by the SYCL runtime library - and it needs to be stored into
the device binary descriptor by the offload wrapper tool. With device code
splitting feature enabled, there can be multiple such sets (clusters) of files -
one per each separate device binary.

Current design of clang driver doesn't allow to model that, namely:
1. Multiple inputs/outputs in the action graph.

> 1. "Clusters" of inputs/outputs, when subsets of inputs/outputs are
> associated and describe different aspects of the same data.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Logical grouping of multiple inputs/outputs - for example, an input or output is multiple pairs of files, where each pair represents information for a single device code module:  [a file with device code, a file with exported symbols].
```

performs requested transformations and outputs a file table or list. From the
clang design standpoint there is still single input and output, even though in
reality there are multiple.

For example, depending on compilation options, files from the "Code" column
above may need to undergo AOT compilation after the device code splitting step,
performed as a part of the code transformation sequence done by the
`sycl-post-link` tool. The driver will then:
- Use the `file-table-tform` to extract the code files and produce a file
  list:
```
a_0.bc
a_1.bc
```
- Pass this file list to the `llvm-for-each` tool along with AOT compilation
command to invoke it on every file in the list. This will result in another
file list
```
a_0.bin
a_1.bin
```
- Then `file-table-tform` is invoked again to replace `.bc` with `.bin` in
the filetable to get a new filetable:
```
  [Code|Symbols|Properties]
  a_0.bin|a_0.sym|a_0.props
  a_1.bin|a_1.sym|a_1.props
```
- Finally, this filetable is passed to the `clang-offfload-wrapper` tool to
construct a wrapper object which embeds all those files.

Note that the graph does not change with growing number of clusters, neither

> it changes when more files are added to each cluster (e.g. a "manifest" file).

Reviewer 4: Please reword, are you trying to say that the graph also doesn't change when more files are added to each cluster?

Author: ok, fixed in latest push.

> Note that the graph does not change with growing number of clusters, neither
> it changes when more files are added to each cluster (e.g. a "manifest" file).

Author: ```suggestion
Note that the graph does not change when more rows (clusters) or columns
(e.g. a "manifest" file) are added to the table.
```

#### Separate Compilation and Linking

The compiler supports such features as
- linking of device code obtained from different source files before generating
  the final SPIR-V to be fed to the back-end.
- splitting application build into separate compile and link steps.

Overall build flow changes compared to the one shown on the diagram 1
above in the following way.  
**Compilation step** ends with engaging the offload
bundler too to generate so-called "fat object" for each
<host object, device code IR> pair produced from the same heterogeneous source.

> So the fat objects files become the result of compilation similarly to object

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The fat object files become the result of compilation similar to object
```

LLVM IR uses function attributes to satisfy "one definition rule", which have
no counterparts in SPIR-V.*

#### Fat binary creation details

"Fat binary" is a result of the final host linking step - this is a host binary
with device binary(s) embedded. When run, it automatically registers

> all available device binaries within the SYCL runtime library. This sections

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
all available device binaries within the SYCL runtime library. This section
```

It returns 0 if no kernels are present and 1 otherwise.

#### Device code post-link step

At link time all the device code is always linked into a single LLVM IR module.
`sycl-post-link` tool performs a number of final transformations on this LLVM IR module before handing it off to
the offload wrapper. Those include:
- device code splitting
- symbol table generation
- specialization constants lowering

Depending on options, `sycl-post-link` can output either a single LLVM IR file,
or multiple files plus a file table referencing all of them. See the
"SYCL support in the driver" section for overall description of file table. The
diagram below shows possible clang action graphs which compilation process will
follow from the single linked LLVM IR module to creating the wrapper object.
There are multiple possible variants of the graph depending on:
- specific target requirements
- device code splitting
- AOT compilation

> ![Multi source compilation flow](images/DeviceLinkAndWrap.svg)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
![Multi source compilation flow](images/DeviceLinkAndWrap.svg)

```
Visualization looks broken here. Maybe empty line helps.

It returns 0 if no kernels are present and 1 otherwise.

#### Device code post-link step

At link time all the device code is always linked into a single LLVM IR module.
After this module is created the `sycl-post-link` tool is invoked on it to
perform a number of final transformations and analyses before handing it off to
the offload wrapper. Those include:
- device code splitting
- symbol table generation
- specialization constants lowering

Depending on options, `sycl-post-link` can output either a single LLVM IR file,
or multiple files plus a file table referencing all of them. See the
"SYCL support in the driver" section for overall description of file table. The
diagram below shows possible clang action graphs which compilation process will
follow from the single linked LLVM IR module to creating the wrapper object.
There are multiple possible variants of the graph depending on whether:
- the target is PTX
- device code splitting is requested
- AOT compilation is requested

> Colors of the graph's edges show which paths are taken depending on the above
> factors. Each edge is also annotated with the input/output file type.
> 
> ![Multi source compilation flow](images/DeviceLinkAndWrap.svg)
> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
![Multi source compilation flow](images/DeviceLinkAndWrap.svg)
<div align="center"> Diagram 3. Device code link flows</div>
Colors of the graph's edges show which paths are taken depending on the above
factors. Each edge is also annotated with the input/output file type.
```

The diagram does not show the `llvm-for-each` tool invocations for clarity.
This tool invokes given command line over each file in a file list. In this
diagram the tool is applied to `llvm-spirv` and AOT backend whenever the
input/output type is `TY_tempfilelist`. The second invocation of the
`file-table-tform` takes two inputs - the file table and a file list coming
either from `llvm-spirv` or from the AOT backend.

> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```
